---
title: "Literary History as a Model for Architectural Traditionalism in Portugal and Brazil"
# First submission for blind peer review
# author: "Pedro P. Palazzo"
# institute: "University of Brasilia School of Architecture"
lang: en-US
csl: "styles/chicago-fullnote-bibliography-with-ibid.csl"
bibliography: 'bibliography/biblio.bib'
suppress-bibliography: true
abstract: # ≤ 100 words content, structure, findings. No KW.
---

<!-- ≅ 7,500 words -->

Introduction
============

The critique of architectural character in Portugal and Brazil from the
mid-nineteenth to the early twentieth centuries derives much of its
motivation and methodology from literary history and criticism.
Moreover, it plays out to a great extent within literary circles, even
as a Portuguese-language architectural press emerges during the Belle
Époque. This context has made the rise of architectural theory in these
two nations virtually invisible to a historiography still mostly
concerned with the study of strictly disciplinary texts[^1].

* * * *

The resulting traditionalist discourses have been based on a stark
differentiation between popular and high culture, privileging rural
housing types after the example of ethnographers, who sought the roots
of national literature in the folk poetry in remote communities. The
virtual unity of the Portuguese language prompts architectural
theorists well into the twentieth century to seek likewise a single
stem-type from which to extract either the forms or the spirit of a new
tradition.

Whereas the notion of a unitary architectural stem has been long
discredited, it leaves behind an imaginary landscape of regional
traditions. A cartography of this landscape can not only locate the
source material leveraged from a variety of vernacular types and
hybrids, but also trace them to the resulting reconstructions, from
explicitly “traditionalist” designs to modernist variations on the
vernacular "spirit."
By envisioning this virtual cartography, I seek to show how architects
and architectural critics in Portugal and Brazil appropriate the goals
and perspectives of literary historians even before the rise of
traditionalist architectural styles. I argue the conflation of diverse
regional traditions into unitary images of national architecture is
evidence not of the "failure" of a retrospectively construed concept of
authenticity, but a way to make sense of a new apparatus of
architectural criticism.

<!-- Article plan -->

Architectural Theory as Literary Genre
======================================

The scope and role of literary discourses on architecture during the
nineteenth century are scarcely acknowledged in the scholarship of
Portuguese and Brazilian architecture. The literary milieu is quite
distinct from that of the engineering and infrastructure debates arising
around the same time, and far less popular among, or methodologically
accessible to, architectural historians. The disciplinary corps of
architecture, ever on the lookout for "pioneers" of modernity, has
focused overwhelmingly on the technical and political aspects of urban
reform [@lisboa:2002engenheiros; @salgueiro:2001cidades] or, at best, on
the built outcomes of socioeconomic change [@lemos:1999republica;
@depaoli:2013entre]. Even as a growing body of social and literary
historians have sought to interpret writers' experiences of the urban
environment [@acerbi:2014long; @aragao:2012passeio;
@colonetti:2007selecao3; @pedruzzi:2008rio3; @resende:2016lima;
@schwarcz:2017minha31; @staudt:2009rio], the influence of literary
history, as well as of the methods of ethnographic critique that stem
from it in the late nineteenth century, in shaping a theory of
architecture is still mostly overlooked.

It is true that, in contrast to the world of civil and social
engineering, architectural theory remains, well into the nineteenth
century, something for the "learned enjoyment" of well-to-do men (seldom
women) of letters. Such is the target audience for João Pacheco's 1734
compendium of cultural and scientific trivia
[@pacheco:1734divertimento], a staple of aristocratic libraries for a
long time thereafter [@macedo:2017biblioteca]. As late as 1823, the
Portuguese court architect, Cyrillo Volkmar Machado (1748--1823)
recommends the study of his Vasarian biographies of artists to "polite"
and "learned" men, that is, to the well-born dilettante
[@machado:1922colleccao, 1]. Conversely, many professional architects
shy away from these elevated circles, or else establish a fitting ethos
in their writing by styling themselves poets, journalists, or
scientists, rather than men of the trade. Such is the case of the
Portuguese architect, archaeologist, and academician, Joaquim Possidónio
Narciso da Silva (1806--1896), as well as of the Brazilian artist, poet,
and diplomat, Manuel de Araújo Porto-Alegre (1806--1879), both of whom
were well versed in science and literature, and had inroads to their
respective royal and imperial courts.

Architectural culture will nevertheless thrive within literary---and, by
extension, historical---circles throughout the nineteenth century, and
muster from it a methodological apparatus as well as a set of historical
references pertaining to the questions of national character and
tradition. A young Araújo Porto-Alegre addresses these questions in what
is among the earliest studies on Brazilian art, a report read before the
Institut Historique in Paris in 1834. His account of colonial
architecture (seventeenth and eighteenth centuries) concocts for it a
commendable Renaissance genealogy that "evidences .\.. the taste of the
new Roman school of Bramante and Buonarroti" and displays even, in one
church, "as if a distant reflection of the admirable frescos of the
Vatican [@magalhaes:1834resume, 50]." Not content with relating
Brazilian architecture directly to Italian sources, Araújo Porto-Alegre
goes so far as to frame its achievements as an unlikely triumph over the
hindrance of Portuguese philistinism [@magalhaes:1834resume, 50]. This
claim sets in motion a nationalist debate on the relationship between
Portuguese tradition and Brazilian particularity that will last for
upwards of a century.

The prescriptive definition of national character in art requires, of
course, a documented body of knowledge on what national art is to begin
with. At this point, the two strands of Romanticism tug in opposite
directions: on one side is the drive for personal originality,
represented Araújo Porto-Alegre; on the other, nationalist
traditionalism, represented by his younger contemporary, the poet
Antonio Gonçalves Dias (1823--1864). The elder master shifts the burden
of building a Brazilian artistic "School" towards the future and onto
the Beaux-Arts education provided by the Imperial Academy of Fine Arts
(AIBA). As its director from 1854 to 1857, he commands a comprehensive
program reform that puts at its center the Romanticist principle of
fostering creative originality rather than academic conformity
[@lima:2016digne, n. 3].

Gonçalves Dias, on the other hand, gives greater weight to tradition and
the study of material culture as sources for contemporary art. He leads
a "scientific commission of exploration" for the Brazilian Historical
and Geographic Institute (IHGB) between 1859 and 1861, bound on
documenting actual examples of popular craft. The commission's work
focuses on the northeastern provinces of Brazil---the historic crucible
of Portuguese colonization---and on traditional culture of communities
descended from either native groups or Portuguese colonists, "far beyond
the confines of the domain of civilization" [@diario:1861exposicao, 1].
This work is conducted under the dual mission statement of the IHGB,
both as the custodian of Brazil's past history and as the collector of
data for future historians' use [@maleval:2020instituto24, 46]. One
major Rio newspaper reporting on the exhibit makes it clear that the
expedition's goal is to foster development arising out of local
traditions, while lamenting the lack of government support for this
[@diario:1861exposicao, 1].

Despite these encouraging beginnings, the optimistic efforts of Araújo
Porto-Alegre's and Gonçalves Dias's generation to promote national
identity by means of distinctive artistic character are all but
forgotten by the 1860s. The writer Joaquim Manuel de Macedo (1820--1882)
bemoans in 1862 the derision with which Gonçalves Dias's scientific
expedition was met in the capital the preceding year, and the
expedition's ensuing halt due to lack of funding [@aragao:2012passeio,
27]. Meanwhile, Portugal is emerging from a traumatic political and
economic reconstruction after the civil war of 1826--1834, and her
intellectuals are contemplating their country's bleak prospects as a
waning colonial power. On both shores of the Atlantic, political and
infrastructural modernization becomes a concern far more pressing than
the affirmation of national identity. Nevertheless, modernization
itself, along with the political crisis of the late nineteenth century,
are to become a catalyst for a renewed interest in national
identity---this time around, in the form of longing for the lost roots
of cultural identity.

Crisis of Cultural Nation-building
==================================

The unstable political and cultural climate of the liberal monarchies
wears on through the second half of the nineteenth century. In both
Portugal and Brazil, already in the 1860s, literary and artistic elites
grow insecure about the path of nation-building through which the
Romantic generation confidently forged ahead. The forward-looking
"history" of Portuguese-language literature, prevalent from the 1830s to
50s, thus gives way to a comprehensive search *backwards* for the roots
of Portuguese ethnicity as well as for markers of originality in
Brazilian culture. Architects will play a more cautious and derivative
role in this process, at some times even stepping back altogether from
the issue of national character, at other times expressing a derivative,
aesthetic aspect of debates played out away from their disciplinary
field.

Traditionalist Methods and Ethnographic Tools
=============================================

Oftentimes, rather than emulating the basic methods of data collection
performed by ethnographers and literary historians, architectural
theories will build upon the higher-order interpretations and even upon
the general conclusions laid out in that scholarship.

Historiography and Authoritarianism
===================================

Conclusion
==========

Notes and References
====================

<!-- Figure out how to insert figures after endnotes -->


[^1]: This shortcoming was, to my knowledge, first pointed out by Macedo
at a very recent date. [@macedo:2017biblioteca]
