---
title : >-
  Literary history as a model for architectural traditionalism in Portugal and Brazil
author: Pedro Paulo Palazzo
date  : 
---

The developments in traditionalist architecture in Portugal and Brazil
since the mid-nineteenth century once derived much of their motivation
and methodology from literary history and criticism in the Romantic
period. The resulting traditionalist styles have been based on a stark
differentiation between popular and high culture, privileging rural
housing types after the example of ethnographers, who sought the roots
of national literature in the folk poetry in remote communities. The
virtual unity of the Portuguese language prompted architectural
theorists well into the twentieth century to seek likewise a single
stem-type from which to extract either the forms or the spirit of a new
tradition.

Whereas the notion of a unitary architectural stem has been long
discredited, it left behind an imaginary landscape of regional
traditions. A cartography of this landscape would locate not only the
source material leveraged from a variety of vernacular types and
hybrids, but also trace them to the resulting reconstructions, from
explicitly “traditionalist” designs to modernist variations on the
vernacular “spirit.” Romantic literary studies provided an early,
abstract model for architects to begin reflecting on their own craft, as
evidenced by Manuel de Araújo Porto Alegre’s schematic history of
Brazilian art as early as the 1830s. Later on, the ethnographic
prominence ascribed to northern Portuguese farmhouses gave a workable
type for the detached, multi-family urban housing of the early twentieth
century, while an oversimplified and deterministic historiography of
colonial architecture in Brazil was used to quell both political dissent
and aesthetic divergence within the ranks of modernist architects.

By envisioning this virtual cartography, I seek to show how architects
and architectural critics in Portugal and Brazil appropriated the goals
and perspectives of literary historians even before the rise of
traditionalist architectural styles. I argue the conflation of diverse
regional traditions into unitary images of national architecture is
evidence not of the “failure” of a retrospectively construed concept of
authenticity, but a way to make sense of a new apparatus of
architectural criticism.

Assistant professor at the University of Brasilia School of Architecture
and Urbanism and visiting scholar at the University of Coimbra Centre
for Social Studies (2019–2020). Architect, with a Ph.D. in aesthetics
and semiology of architecture. His research on the history of
architectural historiography and in late traditional architecture led to
the co-editing of the book Times and scales of the city and urbanism
(University of Brasilia, 2014), and to the chapter « Building typology
in the vernacular architecture of Beirã, » in in *A project for the
future of Beirã (Marvão),* ed. Alejandro García Hermida (Lisbon,
Fundação Serra Henriques)

- The primacy given to (virtual/imaginary) rural types in traditionalist
  architecture has been depicted as being at odds with urban modernity.
  In fact, it provided a stepping stone and justification for the modern
  urban landscape of freestanding buildings, and of multi-family housing
  as the dominant building type (because the rural mansion source
  material was too large for most urban single-family uses).
- Mapping an imaginary landscape of architectural traditions in the late
  19th century. Recognizing (or not) regional variations in the making
  of traditionalist architecture.

IASTE 2020
