# The Literary Craft of Architecture: Portuguese-language Theories 1830–1940 #

![Article](https://github.com/dmcpatrimonio/archlit/workflows/DOCX/badge.svg)

## Table of Contents ##

- In print or under review
  - [The Missing 'Brazilianness' of Nineteenth-century Brazilian Art and Architecture](https://www.routledge.com/Whose-Tradition-Discourses-on-the-Built-Environment/AlSayyad-Gillem-Moffat/p/book/9780367140960) with Ana Amélia de Paula Moura
  - [La critique des styles d'architecture au Brésil: un genre littéraire, 1860--1940](romantisme_critique.md)
  - [Literary History as a Model for Architectural Traditionalism in Portugal and Brazil](article.md)
- Presentations
  - [Teoria da arquitetura como género literário no século XIX](arq-lit.md)
- Snippets
  - [Indianisme comme nationalisme](indianismo.md)
  - [Culturalisme philosophique](culturalisme_philo.md)
  - [Médicaliser la ville et l'architecture](hygiene_rio_imperial.md)
  - [Le XIX<sup>e</sup> siècle à l'aune de la Belle Époque](imperio_republica.md)

## Abstract ##

English · [Português](#resumo)

The developments in traditionalist architecture in Portugal and Brazil
since the mid-nineteenth century once derived much of their motivation
and methodology from literary history and criticism in the Romantic
period. The resulting traditionalist styles have been based on a stark
differentiation between popular and high culture, privileging rural
housing types after the example of ethnographers, who sought the roots
of national literature in the folk poetry in remote communities. The
virtual unity of the Portuguese language prompted architectural
theorists well into the twentieth century to seek likewise a single
stem-type from which to extract either the forms or the spirit of a new
tradition.

Whereas the notion of a unitary architectural stem has been long
discredited, it left behind an imaginary landscape of regional
traditions. A cartography of this landscape would locate not only the
source material leveraged from a variety of vernacular types and
hybrids, but also trace them to the resulting reconstructions, from
explicitly “traditionalist” designs to modernist variations on the
vernacular “spirit.” Romantic literary studies provided an early,
abstract model for architects to begin reflecting on their own craft, as
evidenced by Manuel de Araújo Porto Alegre’s schematic history of
Brazilian art as early as the 1830s. Later on, the ethnographic
prominence ascribed to northern Portuguese farmhouses gave a workable
type for the detached, multi-family urban housing of the early twentieth
century, while an oversimplified and deterministic historiography of
colonial architecture in Brazil was used to quell both political dissent
and aesthetic divergence within the ranks of modernist architects.

By envisioning this virtual cartography, I seek to show how architects
and architectural critics in Portugal and Brazil appropriated the goals
and perspectives of literary historians even before the rise of
traditionalist architectural styles. I argue the conflation of diverse
regional traditions into unitary images of national architecture is
evidence not of the “failure” of a retrospectively construed concept of
authenticity, but a way to make sense of a new apparatus of
architectural criticism.

## Biographical Notice ##

English · [Português](#nota-biográfica)

Assistant professor at the University of Brasilia School of Architecture
and Urbanism and visiting scholar at the University of Coimbra Centre
for Social Studies (2019–2020). Architect, with a Ph.D. in aesthetics
and semiology of architecture. His research on the 
architectural historiography and in late traditional architecture led to
the co-editing of the book *Times and scales of the city and urbanism*
(University of Brasilia, 2014), and to the chapter « Building typology
in the vernacular architecture of Beirã, » in *A project for the
future of Beirã (Marvão),* ed. Alejandro García Hermida (Lisbon,
Fundação Serra Henriques)

## Resumo

[English](#abstract) · Português

O objectivo deste plano é identificar a cartografia literária da
arquitetura tradicional luso-brasileira na obra crítica de escritores,
historiadores, etnógrafos e arquitetos de finais do século XIX e início
do XX.

O desenvolvimento dos movimentos tradicionalistas na literatura,
etnografia e arquitetura de língua portuguesa é tributário das
ideologias nacionalistas associadas ao Romantismo. No ensejo dos seus
modelos literários e etnográficos, a arquitetura tradicionalista
privilegia a morada rural --- por princípio a popular, mas ao fim e ao
cabo também a senhorial --- como legítima fonte da autoridade estética e
tipológica. Mais ainda, à semelhança do debate sobre a unidade orgânica
da língua portuguesa após a independência do Brasil, emerge na segunda
metade do oitocentos, também, um debate sobre a unidade da arquitetura
luso-brasileira. A busca *prospetiva* por um tipo edilício para a nova
tradição, hoje frequentemente confundida com uma busca *retrospetiva*
por evidências arqueológicas de uma raiz singular dessa tradição, é
indissociável de temas similares debatidos nas primeiras histórias da
literatura de língua portuguesa.

O resultado mais notável dessa busca é a paisagem imaginada de
tradições arquitetónicas regionais. Uma cartografia dessa paisagem
poderá situar não apenas as fontes da cultura tradicional, como
também as genealogias da sua apropriação nos movimentos tradicionalistas
e regionalistas numa e noutra margem do Atlântico. A crítica literária
romântica oferece um arcabouço inicial para a reflexão do arquitetos,
ao que se seguem os modelos formulados no rastro das viagens
etnográficas. Estes acabam por legitimar a convencional narrativa da
cisão fundadora entre o Norte e o Sul de Portugal, assim como a
igualmente convencional narrativa da indivisibilidade fundadora do
Brasil lusófono (um paradoxo dentre muitos).

Essa cartografia virtual dá indícios de como arquitetos e críticos de
arquitetura em Portugal e no Brasil, na segunda metade do século XIX, se
apropriam dos fins e das perspetivas da historiografia da literatura,
prenunciando em algumas décadas a eclosão efectiva dos movimentos da
« casa portuguesa » e « neocolonial ». Deste ponto de vista, simplificar
a diversidade de tradições regionais em imagens unitárias ou binárias
da arquitetura nacional evidencia não um defeito de autenticidade
cultural ou de rigor científico --- conceitos erigidos *a posteriori*,
sobretudo pelo movimento Moderno. Pelo contrário, essa simplificação,
sempre contraditória e debatida entre vários autores, demonstra
tentativas diversificadas dos arquitetos em compreender e utilizar
aquele novo aparato crítico importado dos estudos literários.

## Nota biográfica ##

[English](#biographical-notice) · Português

Pedro P. Palazzo é professor assistente na Faculdade de Arquitetura e
Urbanismo da Universidade de Brasília e investigador visitante no Centro
de Estudos Sociais da Universidade de Coimbra (2019–2020). É arquiteto,
doutor em estética e semiótica da arquitetura. Investiga a história da
construção tradicional e a historiografia da arquitetura, com foco no
século XIX e nos contatos entre o classicismo e a modernidade. Organizou
o livro *Tempos e escalas da cidade e do urbanismo* (Editora da
Universidade de Brasília, 2014) e é autor de « Tipologia da edificação
na arquitectura vernácula da Beirã », in *Um projecto de futuro para a
Beirã (Marvão)* (Lisboa: Fundação Serra Henriques, 2018). É coautor de
« The Missing ‘Brazilianness’ of Nineteenth-century Brazilian Art and
Architecture », in *Whose tradition?* (London: Routledge, 2017) e do
verbete sobre o arquiteto e construtor carioca Heitor de Mello no *Grove
Dictionary of Art* (2019).

## License

 archlit (c) 2020 by Pedro P. Palazzo
 
 archlit is licensed under a
 Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported License.
 
 You should have received a copy of the license along with this
 work.  If not, see <http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/>.
